Add the 2201.1.0 Release Note to the Release Branch (#4402)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-2201.1.0/RELEASE_NOTE.md

---
layout: ballerina-left-nav-release-notes
title: Swan Lake 2201.1.0
permalink: /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.1.0/
active: swan-lake-2201.1.0
redirect_from: 
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201-1-0
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201-1-0-swan-lake/
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201-1-0-swan-lake
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes
---

## Overview of Ballerina Swan Lake 2201.1.0 

<em>2201.1.0 (Swan Lake) is the first update of 2201.1.0 (Swan Lake), and it includes a new set of features and significant improvements to the compiler, runtime, standard library, and developer tooling. It is based on the 2022R2 version of the Language Specification.</em> 

## Update Ballerina

> If you are already using Ballerina, use the [Ballerina Update tool](/learn/tooling-guide/cli-tools/update-tool/) to directly update to Swan Lake Beta6 by running the command below.

Reviewer: "Beta6" -> Incorrect version

Author: Fixed via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/commit/d405838f3c8f29f7aed233cef8d6df78c4acc552.

> `bal dist pull 2201.1.0`

## Install Ballerina

If you have not installed Ballerina, then download the [installers](/downloads/#swanlake) to install.

## Language updates

### New features

#### Support for the spread operator in the list constructor

Introduced spread operator support for the list constructor expression.

If the spread operator in a list constructor expression is `...x`, then, `x` is expected to be a list (i.e., an array or a tuple). All the member values of the list that result from evaluating `x` are included in the list value being constructed.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;

public function main() {
    int[] a1 = [3, 4];
    int[] v1 = [1, 2, ...a1];
    io:println(v1); // [1,2,3,4]

    int[2] a2 = [6, 7];
    int[] v2 = [1, 2, ...a1, 5, ...a2];
    io:println(v2); // [1,2,3,4,5,6,7]

    [int, string] t1 = [5, "s"];
    any[] v3 = [...t1, "x"];
    io:println(v3); // [5,"s","x"]

    [boolean, int...] t2 = [false, 4, 7];
    [string, int, string, boolean, int...] v4 = ["x", ...t1, ...t2];
    io:println(v4); // ["x",5,"s",false,4,7];

    var v5 = [4, ...t1, ...a2];
    io:println(v5); // [4,5,"s",6,7];
}

> ```

Reviewer: Code block is not well formatted. Please check

Author: Fixed via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/commit/d405838f3c8f29f7aed233cef8d6df78c4acc552.

The spread operator is not allowed with a variable-length list if the inherent type of the list being constructed has required members that are not guaranteed to have been provided a value.

```ballerina
public function main() {
    [int, string...] t1 = [5, "s"];
    [int, string, string...] v1 = [...t1]; // results in an error since a value is not guaranteed to have been provided for the second tuple member

    [int, boolean, string, int...] t2 = [5, false, "w"];
    [int, boolean, anydata...] v2 = [...t2, "x", "y"]; // works as all fixed tuple members are guaranteed to have been provided values
}

> ```

Reviewer: Code is not formatted.

Author: Fixed via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/commit/d405838f3c8f29f7aed233cef8d6df78c4acc552.

> #### Allow `int*float`, `float*int`,` int* decimal`, `decimal*int`, `float/int`, `decimal/int`, `float%int`, and `decimal%int` multiplicative expressions

Reviewer: Instead of  having this  lengthy title, can we summarize the change in title and  add  all these cases into a paragraph?

Author: @MaryamZi @gimantha

Author: Shall we say `Allowed multiplicative expressions with operands`?

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like

```
#### Support for multiplicative expressions with `int` and `float` or `decimal` operands
```

Basically one operand is int and the other is float or decimal.

Author: Fixed via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/4402/commits/f2119b04fce522df005a62aa4bf83f4454c2f8da.

    io:println(tup.some(x => x.length() == 0)); // false
}
```

##### New `lang.array:every()` function

The `lang.array:every` function tests whether a function returns `true` for every member of a list.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;

function greaterThanTwo(int i) returns boolean {
    return i > 2;
}

public function main() {
    int[] arr = [5, 3, 45];
    io:println(arr.every(greaterThanTwo)); // true

    [string, string] tup = ["", "ballerina"];
    io:println(tup.every(x => x.length() == 0)); // false
}
```

##### New `lang.decimal:quantize()` function

The `lang.decimal:quantize()` function is introduced to control the precision of decimal values. This returns a value equal to the first operand after rounding with the exponent of the second operand.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;

public function main() {
    io:println(decimal:quantize(123.123, 1.0)); // 123.1
    io:println(decimal:quantize(123.123, 1.00)); // 123.12
    io:println(decimal:quantize(123.123, 1.000)); // 123.123
}
```

If the length of the coefficient after the quantize operation is greater than the precision, the function call results in a panic.

```ballerina
public function main() {

>     decimal _ = decimal:quantize(123.1233, 1E-36); // results in a panic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    decimal _ = decimal:quantize(123.1233, 1E-36); // Results in a panic.
```

Author: Fixed via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/commit/d405838f3c8f29f7aed233cef8d6df78c4acc552.

    io:println(555.545.round(1)); // 555.5
    io:println(555.545.round(2)); // 555.54
    io:println(float:round(x)); // 556.0
    io:println(float:round(x, fractionDigits = 0)); // 556.0
    io:println(float:round(x, 1));  // 555.5
    io:println(y.round(2)); // 5.56
    io:println(y.round(fractionDigits)); // 5.556
}
```

#### Revamped `lang.decimal:round` function

The function signature has been changed to have an extra `fractionDigits` parameter, by which, you can specify the number of fraction digits of the rounded result. When `fractionDigits` is zero, the function rounds to an integer.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;

public function main() {
    io:println(5.55.round(1)); // 5.6
    decimal x = 5.55;
    io:println(decimal:round(x)); // 6
    io:println(decimal:round(5.55, fractionDigits = 0)); // 6
    io:println(decimal:round(5.5565, fractionDigits = 3)); // 5.556
}
```

#### Removed the compilation error for an unreachable panic statement

An unreachable panic statement no longer results in a compilation error.

```ballerina
function fn() returns string {
    int|string a = 10;

    if a is int {
        return "INT";
    } else {
        return "STRING";
    }

>     panic error("Not Reached!"); // unreachable, but not an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    panic error("Not Reached!"); // Unreachable, but not an error.
```

Author: Fixed via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/commit/d405838f3c8f29f7aed233cef8d6df78c4acc552.

}
```

#### Updated `lang.error:Cloneable` to be `public`

The `Cloneable` type in the `lang.error` module is now `public`.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;

public function main() {
    error:Cloneable x = 4;
    error e1 = error("reason 1", message = "My Detail");
    map<error:Cloneable> m1 = e1.detail();

    io:println(x);  // 4
    io:println(m1); // {"message":"My Detail"}
}
```

> #### Disallow inferring array length in contexts that are not permitted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Disallowed inferring array length in contexts that are not permitted
```

Author: Done via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/commit/d405838f3c8f29f7aed233cef8d6df78c4acc552.

    ```ballerina
    function fn(error e) {
        match e {
            error(errors:MESSAGE) => { // Match pattern is now allowed.

            }
        }
    }
    ```

- Fixed the inherent type of a list constructed using a list constructor with `any` as the contextually-expected type to be `(any|error)[]` instead of `any[]`

    ```ballerina
    public function main() {
        any x = [1, 3, 4];
        if x is (any|error)[] {
            x.push(error("invalid!")); // Allowed now. Previously, failed at runtime.
        }
    }
    ```

- Fixed a bug that allowed additive expressions with operands of types that are union types of different basic types 

    ```ballerina
    public function main() {
        int|float a = 4;
        int|float b = 4.5;

        int _ = a + b; // Now, this results in a compilation error.
    }
    ```

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake 2201.1.0](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FCompilerFE+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+2201.1.0%22).

## Runtime updates

### Improvements

> #### Support to provide values for configurable variables through TOML in-line tables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Added support to provide values for configurable variables through TOML in-line tables
```

Author: Done via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/4402/commits/d405838f3c8f29f7aed233cef8d6df78c4acc552.

The configurable feature is improved to support variables of tuple types through the TOML syntax.

For example, if the tuple-typed configurable variables are defined in the following way,

```ballerina
configurable [int, string, float, decimal, byte, boolean] simpleTuple = ?;
configurable [int[], [string, int], map<anydata>, table<map<string>>] complexTuple = ?;
configurable [int, string, int...] restTuple = ?;
```

the values can be provided in the `Config.toml` file as follows.

```toml
simpleTuple = [278, "string", 2.3, 4.5, 2, true]

complexTuple = [[1, 3, 5, 7, 9], ["apple", 2], {name = "Baz Qux", age = 22}, [{a = "a"}, {b = "b", c = "c"}]]

restTuple = [1, "foo", 2, 3, 4, 5]
```

#### Improved configurable variables to support union types through CLI arguments

The configurable feature is improved to support variables of union types with simple basic typed members through the CLI arguments.

For example, if the configurable variables are defined in the following way,

```ballerina
configurable float|int|string unionVar = ?; 
```

the values can be provided via CLI arguments in the following way.

```bash

> bal run -- -Cval=5.0

Reviewer: Shouln't we change this as `bal run -- -CunionVar=5.0` to be complied with previous definition? @warunalakshitha ?

Reviewer 3: yes. it should be. My bad.
```suggestion
bal run -- -CunionVar=5.0
```

### Bug fixes

#### `grpc` package

- Fixed incorrect stub generation for repeated values of any, struct, timestamp, and duration messages
- Fixed incorrect caller type name validation in the gRPC compiler plugin
- Fixed passing Protobuf predefined types as repeated values and values in messages

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake 2201.1.0](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-standard-library/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%222201.1.0%22+label%3AType%2FBug).

## Deployment updates

### New features

Added the `name` field for the `cloud.config.files` property in the `Cloud.toml` file to change the name of the generated config map 

### Improvements
- Reduced the package size of `ballerina/cloud`
- Docker image generation now relies on the user's docker client
- Added the `ballerinax/awslambda` package in [Ballerina Central](https://central.ballerina.io/ballerinax/awslambda)
- Added the `ballerinax/azure_functions` package in [Ballerina Central](https://central.ballerina.io/ballerinax/azure.functions)

### Breaking changes

> For existing `ballerinax/awslambda` and `ballerinax/azure_functions` projects, change the version to `2.1.0` in the `Dependencies.toml` file.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For existing `ballerinax/awslambda` and `ballerinax/azure_functions` projects, delete the `Dependencies.toml` file and build the project.
```

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake 2201.1.0](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-c2c/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+2201.1.0%22).

## Developer tools updates

### New features

#### AsyncAPI tool

> Introduced the Ballerina AsyncAPI tool, which will make it easy for you to start the development of an event API documented in an AsyncAPI contract in Ballerina by generating Ballerina service and listener skeletons. Ballerina Swan Lake supports the AsyncAPI Specification version 2.x. For more information, see [Ballerina AsyncAPI support](/learn/ballerina-asyncapi-support) and [AsyncAPI CLI documentation](/learn/cli-documentation/asyncapi/#asyncapi-to-ballerina).

Reviewer: Provide the link to AsyncAPI Specification version 2.x.

Reviewer 5: Seems like a common link is not available pointing all the versions. But maybe we can go with https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.0.0. It points to the rest of the specifications.

Author: @HasithaAthukorala

Author: Added via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/4402/commits/ca8f32cdbad002463f4a82a020b3aed1308454f7.

#### GraphQL tool

Introduced the Ballerina GraphQL tool, which will make it easy for you to generate a client in Ballerina given the GraphQL schema (SDL) and GraphQL queries. Ballerina Swan Lake supports the GraphQL specification [October 2021 edition](https://spec.graphql.org/October2021/). For more information, see [Ballerina GraphQL support](/learn/ballerina-graphql-support/) and [GraphQL CLI documentation](/learn/cli-documentation/graphql/#graphql-to-ballerina).

#### Language server

- Added completion and code action support for already-imported modules in the Ballerina user home
- Implemented file operation events in the Language Server

### Improvements

#### Debugger

> Added runtime breakpoint verification support. With this improvement, the debugger is expected to verify all the valid breakpoint locations in the current debug source. All the breakpoints that are set on non-executable lines of code (i.e., Ballerina line comments, documentation , blank lines, declarations, etc.) will be marked as `unverified` in the editor.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Added runtime breakpoint verification support. With this improvement, the debugger is expected to verify all the valid breakpoint locations in the current debug source. All the breakpoints that are set on non-executable lines of code (i.e., Ballerina line comments, documentation , blank lines, declarations, etc.) will be marked as `unverified` in the editor.
```

Author: We don't need a bullet point when there is only one single paragraph (which is not a list).

Reviewer 6: @praneesha Ack. +1

#### Language server

- Improved the `Document this code` action to support module-level variables
- Added signature help for included record params
- Revamped the code action utilities introducing a new API to find the top-level node for a given code action context
- Improved completion item sorting in several contexts
- Improved the `Create function` code action to handle named arguments
- Improved the `Create function` code action to add an isolated qualifier
- Added signature help for union-typed expressions

> 

Author: Adde via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/4402/commits/c3fde4e92c13da245160ffd8b1bb8fd214bf35c9.

            }
        }
    }
    ```

- Fixed the inherent type of a list constructed using a list constructor with `any` as the contextually-expected type to be `(any|error)[]` instead of `any[]`

    ```ballerina
    public function main() {
        any x = [1, 3, 4];
        if x is (any|error)[] {
            x.push(error("invalid!")); // Allowed now. Previously, failed at runtime.
        }
    }
    ```

- Fixed a bug that allowed additive expressions with operands of types that are union types of different basic types 

    ```ballerina
    public function main() {
        int|float a = 4;
        int|float b = 4.5;

        int _ = a + b; // Now, this results in a compilation error.
    }
    ```

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake 2201.1.0](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FCompilerFE+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+2201.1.0%22).

## Runtime updates

### Improvements

#### Support to provide values for configurable variables through TOML in-line tables

The configurable feature is improved to support TOML in-line tables through the TOML syntax.

> The values for configurable variables of types `map` and `record` can now beprovided using TOML in-line tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The values for configurable variables of types `map` and `record` can now be provided using TOML in-line tables.
```

Author: Sorry, this was already fixed and I have missed pushing the commit https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/4402/commits/5c848ddf159295d59ad8a1b96eebea73d7252d12.

- Allowed passing a replacer function to `replace` and `replaceAll` APIs. Now the regex matches can be replaced with a new string value or the value returned by the specified replacer function

#### `file` package

- Introduced the constants for path and path list separators
  - `file:pathSeparator`: It is a character used to separate the parent directories, which make up the path to a specific location. For windows, it’s `\` and for UNIX it’s `/`
  - `file:pathListSeparator`: It is a character commonly used by the operating system to separate paths in the path list. For windows, it’s `;` and for UNIX it’s `:`

#### `os` package
- Introduced the `setEnv()` function to set an environment variable
- Introduced the `unsetEnv()` function to remove an environment variable from the system
- Introduced the `listEnv()` function to list the existing environment variables of the system

### Improvements

#### `http` package

> - Allowed `Caller` to respond an `error` or a `StatusCodeResponse`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allowed `Caller` to respond to an `error` or a `StatusCodeResponse`
```

#### GraphQL tool

Introduced the Ballerina GraphQL tool, which will make it easy for you to generate a client in Ballerina given the GraphQL schema (SDL) and GraphQL queries. Ballerina Swan Lake supports the GraphQL specification [October 2021 edition](https://spec.graphql.org/October2021/). For more information, see [Ballerina GraphQL support](http://ballerina.io/learn/ballerina-graphql-support/) and [Graphql CLI documentation](http://ballerina.io/learn/cli-documentation/graphql/#graphql-to-ballerina).

#### Language server

- Added completion and code action support for already-imported modules in the Ballerina user home
- Implemented file operation events in the Language Server

### Improvements

#### Debugger

> Added rutime breakpoint verification support. With this improvement, the debugger is expected to verify all the valid breakpoint locations in the current debug source. All the breakpoints that are set on non-executable lines of code (i.e., Ballerina line comments, documentation , blank lines, declarations, etc.) will be marked as `unverified` in the editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Added runtime breakpoint verification support. With this improvement, the debugger is expected to verify all the valid breakpoint locations in the current debug source. All the breakpoints that are set on non-executable lines of code (i.e., Ballerina line comments, documentation , blank lines, declarations, etc.) will be marked as `unverified` in the editor.
```

Author: Fixed via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/4402/commits/5c848ddf159295d59ad8a1b96eebea73d7252d12.

```

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake 2201.1.0](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+2201.1.0%22+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FjBallerina+).

## Standard library updates

### New features

#### `ftp` package

- Introduced the `ftp:Caller` API and added it as an optional parameter in the `onFileChange` method
- Added compiler plugin validation support for the `ftp:Service`
- Added code-actions to generate an `ftp:Service` template

#### `http` package

- Introduced `ResponseInterceptor` and `ResponseErrorInterceptor`
- Introduced `DefaultErrorInterceptor`
- Added code-actions to generate the interceptor method template
- Allowed records to be annotated with `@http:Header`
- Added basic type support for header parameters in addition to `string` and `string[]`
- Added `anydata` support for service and client data binding
- Added common constants for HTTP status-code responses
- Added union type support for service and client data binding
- Added OpenAPI definition field in the service config

> 

Reviewer 7: - Introduce new HTTP error types and improve error categorizing
